first pass at howto for ontologies as values (#1585)
linkml/linkml: docs/howtos/ontologies-as-values.md

# Using ontology terms as values in data

LinkML provides a flexible way of modeling data. LinkML allows for the optional use
of *ontologies*, *vocabularies*, or *controlled vocabularies* to add semantics to
datamodels, for example, by mapping classes or slots to external terms.

This howto guide deals with another use case, where we want to include ontology
elements as data values in our data model. In formal terms, this is called including
ontology elements *in the domain of discourse*.

This is in principle straightforward - we just treat ontology elements
the same way we would any other identifier or object. However, in some
cases, this can lead to confusion about what the respective roles of
the LinkML schema, data, or ontologies are.

## Example: associations to ontology terms.

Let's say we want to model associations between genes and
phenotypes. This is a standard use case for biological ontologies -

> creating *annotation* that associate some kind of entity with a descriptor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creating *annotations* that associate some kind of entity with a descriptor.
```

In the simplest case, this might be communicated by a two-column file

|Gene|Phenotype|
|---|---|
|PEX1|Seizure|
|PEX1|Hypotonia|

> This uses labels which is not best practice, we should instead do this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This uses labels, which is not best practice; we should instead do this:
```

|Gene|Gene Label|Phenotype|Phenotype Label|
|---|---|---|---|
|NCBIGene:5189|PEX1|HP:0001250|Seizure|
|NCBIGene:5189|PEX1|HP:0001252|Hypotonia|

This is *denormalized* because we end up repeating values

If we go with a richer data serialization form like YAML, JSON, RDF,
or a normalized relational database we can have a normalized representation, e.g.

```yaml
associations:
  - gene: NCBIGene:5189
    phenotype: HP:0001250
  - gene: NCBIGene:5189
    phenotype: HP:0001252
genes:
  - id: NCBIGene:5189
    label: PEX1
phenotypes:
  - id: HP:0001250
    label: Seizure
  - id: HP:0001252
    label: Hypotonia
```

However, for now let's return to the simple 2-element model:

|Gene|Phenotype|
|---|---|
|NCBIGene:5189|HP:0001250|
|NCBIGene:5189|HP:0001252|

The simplest data model that could work for this case is:

```yaml
classes:
 GenePhenotypeAssociation:
   attributes:
     gene:
     phenotype:
```

Note that the schema doesn't care that the phenotypes come from an ontology, or that the genes
come from a standard resource - these are just pieces of data.

However, this isn't quite satisfactory - it allows the data provider to put any free text they like in.

> We want to constrain to identifiers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to constrain to identifiers.
```

Let's constrain it a bit more:

```yaml
classes:
 GenePhenotypeAssociation:
   attributes:
     gene:
       range: uriorcurie
     phenotype:
       range: uriorcurie
```

We can constrain it further:

```yaml
classes:
 GenePhenotypeAssociation:
   attributes:
     gene:
       range: uriorcurie
       pattern: "NCBIGene:\d+"
     phenotype:
       range: uriorcurie
       pattern: "HP:\d+"
```

> (obviously this constrains the schema so tightly it's can't be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(obviously this constrains the schema so tightly it can't be used
```

rather than forcing the client to do an external lookup?

Let's go one step further, and make a *class* for gene and phenotype:

```yaml
classes:
 GenePhenotypeAssociation:
   attributes:
     gene:
       range: Gene
     phenotype:
       range: Phenotype
       pattern: "HP:\d+"
 Gene:
   attributes:
     id:
       range: uriorcurie
       identifier: true
     label:
 Phenotype:
   attributes:
     id:
       range: uriorcurie
       identifier: true
     label:
```

We can abstract it a bit further to avoid repetition:

```yaml
classes:
 GenePhenotypeAssociation:
   attributes:
     gene:
       range: Gene
     phenotype:
       range: Phenotype
       pattern: "HP:\d+"
 NamedThing:
   attributes:
     id:
       range: uriorcurie
       identifier: true
     label:
 Gene:
  is_a: NamedThing
 Phenotype:
  is_a: NamedThing
```

Let's add a container class:

```
  Container:
    attributes:
      genes:
        range: Gene
        inlined_as_list: true
      phenotypes:
        range: Phenotype
        inlined_as_list: true
      associations:
        range: Association
        inlined_as_list: true  ## not necessary as Association has no id
      
```

> Note that inlining is non-default if a referenced entity has an identifiers. This means

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that inlining is non-default if a referenced entity has an identifier. This means
```

> that the right way to represent an associations is using using references (like foreign

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the right way to represent associations is using references (like foreign
```

IndividualOrganism:
```yaml
id: wikidata:Q517
label: Napoleon Bonaparte
species: NCBITaxon:9606
```

Species:
```yaml
id: NCBITaxon:9606
label: Homo sapiens
parent_concept: NCBITaxon:9605
```

Note here that in the LinkML model, our __classes__ are
*IndividualOrganism*, *Species*, *Genus*, (and potentially other
ranks, and a generic grouping of these). Our __instances__ are
Napolean, Homo sapiens, Homo.

When we translate the YAML above to RDF we get:

```turtle
wikidata:Q517 rdf:type my:IndividualOrganism .
NCBITaxon:9606 rdf:type my:Species .
NCBITaxon:9606 my:parent_concept NCBITaxon:9605
NCBITaxon:9605 rdf:type my:Genus .
```

In OWL terms, this is called the **ABox**

Our LinkML schema can also be represented as RDF or OWL (formally: **TBox**)

```turtle
my:IndividualOrganism a owl:Class .
my:Genus a owl:Class .
my:Species a owl:Class .
my:Genus rdfs:subClassOf my:OrganismTaxonomicConcept
my:Species rdfs:subClassOf my:OrganismTaxonomicConcept
```

(omitting some axioms for brevity)

Again, this should not be such a foreign way of modeling things from a standard database perspective.
But if you are coming from ontology modeling this could be confusing.

> Next, we'll look at an ontologists' way of modeling the same domain. Let's first summarize the LinkML model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll look at an ontologist's way to model the same domain. Let's first summarize the LinkML model:
```

> - both individuals like Napolean as well as taxonomic concepts like human, cat, are *instances*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Individuals such as Napoleon as well as taxonomic concepts such as human or cat are *instances*
```

> - individuals like Napoleaon instantiate "individual organism", whereas taxonomic concepts instantiate Species, Genus, etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- individuals such as Napoleon instantiate "individual organism", whereas taxonomic concepts instantiate Species, Genus, etc
```

- we can add more properties and constraints on each LinkML class, e.g.
    - make `species` a required field
    - constrain the parent of `Species` to be a `Genus` rather than any taxonomic concept
    - add appropriate slots to "IndividualOrganism", e.g. a single-value-per-time geolocation
    - add appropriate slots to taxonomic concepts
        - common name vs scientific name
        - constrain species names to be binomial
        - geolocation ranges

From a LinkML modeling perspective, these additional properties would be Good Things. They allow
us to constrain our data model to avoid instance data that is invalid or surprising (for example,

> Napolean having a "species" value of "Vertebrate" or "HistoricHuman").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Napoleon having a "species" value of "Vertebrate" or "HistoricHuman").
```

In these ontologies, there is neither a "individual organism" class nor classes for ranks like "species".

Instead there is just a hierarchy of organism OWL classes, increasingly refined:

* Organism
    * Vertebrate
        * Mammalia
            * Homo
                * Homo sapiens
            * Felis
                * Felis catus
                    * Russian blue
            

(Intermediate nodes omitted for brevity)

There is also nothing formally prohibiting classes such as
"FriendlyMammal" or "HistoricHuman", but by convention the class
hierarchy mirrors conventional classifications that mirror phylogeny.

In this model there are no logical elements "species" or "genus". It's common practice
to include the taxonomic rank as an OWL *annotation property*. If we want to include these
concepts as true first-class logical citizens in an OWL model, then we need to either introduce
*punning* (OWL-DL) or *metaclasses* (OWL-Full).

In practice, punning or metaclasses are not used much in OWL, so let's stick with the rank-free
model. Formally, concepts like "Homo sapiens" are not in the *domain of discourse*.

> Individual organisms like Napolean (Q517 in Wikidata) instantiate the classes in the hierarchy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Individual organisms like Napoleon (Q517 in Wikidata) instantiate the classes in the hierarchy:
```

```rdf
wikidata:Q517 rdf:type NCBITaxon:9606 .
NCBITaxon:9606 rdfs:subClassOf NCBITaxon:9605
```

Compare to the RDF serialization of the LinkML instances:

```rdf
wikidata:Q517 my:species NCBITaxon:9606 .
NCBITaxon:9606 my:parent_concept NCBITaxon:9605
```
        
In this case, `rdf:type` corresponds roughly to the `species` attribute in the LinkML model. It's not quite the same, as we might have the following OWL:

```rdf
wikidata:Q517 rdf:type NCBITaxon:9605 .  ## Homo
```

This is valid (and entailed) but less specific. Note that this would be disallowed
in the LinkML model, which intentionally forces the data provider to provide a species-level

> taxon node ID rather than any other taxon ID,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
taxon node ID rather than any other taxon ID.
```

  is_a: NamedThing
  abstract: true
  attributes:
    parent_concept:
      range: OrganismTaxonomicConcept
      slot_uri: rdfs:subClassOf   ## map parent_concept to subsumption
 Species:
  is_a: OrganismTaxonomicConcept
  examples:
    - description: Homo sapiens
    - description: Felis catus
 Genus:
  is_a: OrganismTaxonomicConcept
  examples:
    - description: Homo
    - description: Felis
```

The LinkML instances now serialize as:

```rdf
wikidata:Q517 rdf:type NCBITaxon:1 .
wikidata:Q517 rdf:type NCBITaxon:9606 .
NCBITaxon:9606 rdf:type my:Species .
NCBITaxon:9606 rdfs:subClassOf NCBITaxon:9605
NCBITaxon:9605 rdf:type my:Genus .
```

Viewed through the lens of RDF/OWL this is potentially
confusing. Under OWL2 Description Logic semantics, we have introduced
*punning*, and under OWL-Full we have *metaclasses*. The latter
approach is quite common in knowledge bases such as Wikidata.

### Separate models

We can imagine people getting confused, and making incorrect inferences
such as the following:

1. Homo sapiens is a Species
2. Species is a Genus
3. Therefore, Homo sapiens is a Genus

Clearly this is wrong. In fact entailment is thankfully not justified

> either via the LinkML or via the RDF/OWL (either punning model or metaclass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
either via the LinkML or via the RDF/OWL (either punning model or metaclass).
```

However, there are some cases where hierarchies in our data model do
trivially mirror our ontological hierarchies. There are some schemas
and data models that also resemble upper ontologies.

* schema.org for everyday concepts like Person, CreativeWork
* biolink for biological concepts like Gene, Chemical, Disease
* chemrof for chemical concepts like atom, isotope, molecule

In the case of schema.org, most elements can do double duty as
ontology classes compatible with OBO-style realist modeling (intended
to model the world scientifically) as well as schema classes (intended
to model how we exchange data about the things in the world).

However, this can get quite nuanced. Sometimes there are
classifications that make sense in one perspective and not in the
other.

The modeling of personhood in ontologies can get quite involved. Some
ontologies will treat Person as a subclass of Homo sapiens (which is
scientifically valid but from a modeling perspective mixes two
separate concerns); other ontologies may represent personhood as a
"role", which complicates things if you want to have straightforward
connections between concepts like "Person" and "Address"

> This gets even more nuanced with biomedical concepts. There there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This gets even more nuanced with biomedical concepts, where we have to deal with
```

multiple interlinked ontological debates about modeling concepts like
Gene and Allele, and whether these are classes or instances. Most
bio-ontologies eliminate the concept of "levels" in hierarchies, so
the concepts "eukaroyotic gene", "gene", "human Shh gene" and "human
Shh gene with foo variant" are all valid gene concepts, just at
different levels of the hierarchy.

Additionally, ontologists have a habit of grouping unlike entities or
separating like concepts, on the basis of upper ontologies.

A full discussion of these issues is well outside the scope of this
guide.

From a modeling perspective, the key points are:

- use the appropriate modeling framework for the problem at hand

> - mirror hierarchies were appropriate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- mirror hierarchies where appropriate
```
